C F C
We integrate conditionals into the semantics of modal expressions that we are developing. We show that the material implication analysis and the strict implication analysis are inferior to the restrictor analysis. Our discussion will remain focussed on some simple questions and we refer you to the rich literature on conditionals for further topics.

. . .

The Material Implication Analysis  The Strict Implication Analysis  If -Clauses as Restrictors 

Supplemental Readings 

.
()

The Material Implication Analysis
If I am healthy, I will come to class.

Consider the following example:

The simplest analysis of such conditional constructions is the so-called   analysis, which treats if as contributing a truth-function operating on the truth-values of the two component sentences (which are called the  and  -- from Latin -- or  and  -- from Greek). The lexical entry for if would look as follows: ()
if = u  Dt . v  Dt . u =  or v = .
Note that as a truth-functional connective, this if does not vary its denotation depending on the evaluation world. It's its arguments that vary with the evaluation world.

Applied to example in (), this semantics would predict that the example is false just in case the antecedent is true, I am healthy, but the consequent false, I do not come to class. Otherwise, the sentence is true. We will see that there is
 Quoth the Stoic philosopher Philo of Megara: "a true conditional is one which does not have a true antecedent and a false consequent" (according to Sextus Empiricus (c. : II, ­)).



C



C 

much to complain about here. But one should realize that under the assumption that if denotes a truth-function, this one is the most plausible candidate. Suber () does a good job of persuading (or at least trying to persuade) recalcitrant logic students: After saying all this, it is important to note that material implication does conform to some of our ordinary intuitions about implication. For example, take the conditional statement, If I am healthy, I will come to class. We can symbolize it: H  C. The question is: when is this statement false? When will I have broken my promise? There are only four possibilities: H C T T T F F T F F H C ? ? ? ?

· In case #, I am healthy and I come to class. I have clearly kept my promise; the conditional is true. · In case #, I am healthy, but I have decided to stay home and read magazines. I have broken my promise; the conditional is false. · In case #, I am not healthy, but I have come to class anyway. I am sneezing all over you, and you're not happy about it, but I did not violate my promise; the conditional is true. · In case #, I am not healthy, and I did not come to class. I did not violate my promise; the conditional is true. But this is exactly the outcome required by the material implication. The compound is only false when the antecedent is true and the consequence is false (case #); it is true every other time. Despite the initial plausibility of the analysis, it cannot be maintained. Consider this example: () If there is a major earthquake in Cambridge tomorrow, my house will collapse.

 The symbol  which Suber uses here is called the "horseshoe". We have been using the right arrow  as the symbol for implication. We think that this is much preferable to the confusing horseshoe symbol. There is an intimate connection between universal quantification, material implication, and the subset relation, usually symbolized as , which is the other way round from the horseshoe. The horseshoe can be traced back to the notation introduced by Peano (), a capital C standing for `conseguenza' facing backwards. The C facing in the other (more "logical") direction was actually introduced first by Gergonne (), but didn't catch on.

§.



T M I A



If we adopt the material implication analysis, we predict that () will be false just in case there is indeed a major earthquake in Cambridge tomorrow but my house fails to collapse. This makes a direct prediction about when the negation of () should be true. A false prediction, if ever there was one: () a. b. It's not true that if there is a major earthquake in Cambridge tomorrow, my house will collapse.  There will be a major earthquake in Cambridge tomorrow, and my house will fail to collapse.

Clearly, one might think that (a) is true without at all being committed to what the material implication analysis predicts to be the equivalent statement in (b). This is one of the inadequacies of the material implication analysis. These inadequacies are sometimes referred to as the "paradoxes of material implication". But that is misleading. As far as logic is concerned, there is nothing wrong with the truth-function of material implication. It is well-behaved and quite useful in logical systems. What is arguable is that it is not to be used as a reconstruction of what conditionals mean in natural language. E .: Under the assumption that if has the meaning in (), calculate the truth-conditions predicted for (): () a. b. No student will succeed if he goofs off. No student x (if x goofs off, x will succeed)
S

State the predicted truth-conditions in words and evaluate whether they correspond to the actual meaning of (). 
Conditional if S we are on Route 

S Modal S

A problem that is not often raised for the material implication analysis is how badly it interacts with the analysis of modal expressions, once we look at Figure .: LF A for sentences involving both a conditional clause and a modal. Consider: () () If we are on Route , we might be in Lockhart now.
might R

we be in Lockhart

S

()

If you keep this fern dry, it cannot grow.

Modal might R Conditional

S

We need to consider two possible LFs for these sentences, depending on whether wider scope is given to the modal or to the conditional clause. For example, in the margin you see LFs A and B for (). Figure .: LF B for The reading for () we have in mind is an epistemic one; imagine for () instance that () is uttered in a car by Mary to Susan, while Susan is driving and Mary is looking at a map. The information provided by the map, together with other background knowledge, constitutes the relevant context for the modal might here. The accessibility relation is roughly this:
if S we are on Route 

S

we be in Lockhart

 ()

C



C 

w. w  . w  is compatible with what the map says in w and what Mary knows about the geography of the relevant area in w.

Let's suppose () is uttered in the actual world w and we are interested in its truth-value at this world. We now proceed to show that neither of the LFs A and B represent the intuitively natural meaning of () if we assume the material implication analysis of if. Consider first LF A. There are two respects in which the predicted truthconditions for this LF deviate from intuitive judgment. First, suppose that Susan and Mary are not on Route  in w . Then () is predicted to be true in w , regardless of the geographical facts, e.g. even if Lockhart is nowhere near Route . This is counterintuitive. Imagine the following quite sensible dialogue: () Mary: If we are on Route , we might be in Lockhart now. Susan (stops the car and looks at the map): You are wrong. Look here, Route  doesn't run anywhere near Lockhart.

If Mary concedes Susan's claim that Route  doesn't go through Lockhart, she has to also concede that her original assertion was false. It wouldn't do for her to respond: "I know that  runs about  miles east of Lockhart, but maybe we are not on Route , so I may still be right." Yet we predict that this should be a reasonable way for her to defend (). A second inadequacy is this: we predict that the truth of the consequent of () is a sufficient condition for the truth of () as a whole. If this were right, it would take very little for () to be true. As long as the map and the rest of Mary's knowledge in w don't rule out the possibility that they are in Lockhart, we might be in Lockhart will be true in w -- regardless, once again, of whether Lockhart is anywhere near . It should therefore be reasonable for Mary to continue the dialogue in () with the rejoinder: "But how can you be so sure we are not in Lockhart?" According to intuitive judgment, however, this would not be a pertinent remark and certainly would not help Mary defend () against Susan's objection. Now let's look at LF B, where the modal has widest scope. Given the material implication analysis of if, this is predicted to mean, in effect: "It might be the case that we are either in Lockhart or not on Route ". This truth-condition is also far too easy to satisfy: All it takes is that the map and the rest of Mary's knowledge in w are compatible with Mary and Susan not being on Route , or that they are compatible with their being in Lockhart. So as long as it isn't certain that they are on Route , Mary should be justified in asserting (), regardless, once again, of her information about the relative location of Lockhart and Route . E .: Show that similar difficulties arise for the analysis of ().


