<section>Speech synthesis is the artificial production of human speech. A computer systemused for this purpose is called a speech synthesizer, and can be implemented insoftware or hardware. A text-to-speech (TTS) system converts normal languagetext into speech; other systems render symbolic linguistic representations likephonetic transcriptions into speech.[1]Synthesized speech can be created by concatenating pieces of recorded speechthat are stored in a database. Systems differ in the size of the stored speechunits; a system that stores phones or diphones provides the largest outputrange, but may lack clarity. For specific usage domains, the storage of entirewords or sentences allows for high-quality output. Alternatively, a synthesizercan incorporate a model of the vocal tract and other human voice characteristicsto create a completely "synthetic" voice output.[2]The quality of a speech synthesizer is judged by its similarity to the humanvoice and by its ability to be understood. An intelligible text-to-speechprogram allows people with visual impairments or reading disabilities to listento written works on a home computer. Many computer operating systems haveincluded speech synthesizers since the early 1980s.Contents [hide]1 Overview of text processing2 History2.1 Electronic devices3 Synthesizer technologies3.1 Concatenative synthesis3.1.1 Unit selection synthesis3.1.2 Diphone synthesis3.1.3 Domain-specific synthesis3.2 Formant synthesis3.3 Articulatory synthesis3.4 HMM-based synthesis3.5 Sinewave synthesis4 Challenges4.1 Text normalization challenges4.2 Text-to-phoneme challenges4.3 Evaluation challenges4.4 Prosodics and emotional content5 Dedicated hardware6 Computer operating systems or outlets with speech synthesis6.1 Atari6.2 Apple6.3 AmigaOS6.4 Microsoft Windows6.5 Android6.6 Internet6.7 Others7 Speech synthesis markup languages8 Applications9 See also10 References11 External links</section>


<section>Section 1 Overview of text processingOverview of a typical TTS systemSample of Microsoft SamMicrosoft Windows XP's default speech synthesizer voice saying "The quick brownfox jumps over the lazy dog 1,234,567,890 times"Problems listening to this file? See media help.A text-to-speech system (or "engine") is composed of two parts[3]: a front-endand a back-end. The front-end has two major tasks. First, it converts raw textcontaining symbols like numbers and abbreviations into the equivalent ofwritten-out words. This process is often called text normalization,pre-processing, or tokenization. The front-end then assigns phonetictranscriptions to each word, and divides and marks the text into prosodic units,like phrases, clauses, and sentences. The process of assigning phonetictranscriptions to words is called text-to-phoneme or grapheme-to-phonemeconversion. Phonetic transcriptions and prosody information together make up thesymbolic linguistic representation that is output by the front-end. Theback-end—often referred to as the synthesizer—then converts the symboliclinguistic representation into sound. In certain systems, this part includes thecomputation of the target prosody (pitch contour, phoneme durations[4]), whichis then imposed on the output speech.</section>


<section>Section 2 HistoryLong before electronic signal processing was invented, there were those whotried to build machines to create human speech. Some early legends of theexistence of "speaking heads" involved Gerbert of Aurillac (d. 1003 AD),Albertus Magnus (1198–1280), and Roger Bacon (1214–1294).In 1779, the Danish scientist Christian Kratzenstein, working at the RussianAcademy of Sciences, built models of the human vocal tract that could producethe five long vowel sounds (in International Phonetic Alphabet notation, theyare [a?], [e?], [i?], [o?] and [u?]).[5] This was followed by thebellows-operated "acoustic-mechanical speech machine" by Wolfgang von Kempelenof Vienna, Austria, described in a 1791 paper.[6] This machine added models ofthe tongue and lips, enabling it to produce consonants as well as vowels. In1837, Charles Wheatstone produced a "speaking machine" based on von Kempelen'sdesign, and in 1857, M. Faber built the "Euphonia". Wheatstone's design wasresurrected in 1923 by Paget.[7]In the 1930s, Bell Labs developed the VOCODER, a keyboard-operated electronicspeech analyzer and synthesizer that was said to be clearly intelligible. HomerDudley refined this device into the VODER, which he exhibited at the 1939 NewYork World's Fair.The Pattern playback was built by Dr. Franklin S. Cooper and his colleagues atHaskins Laboratories in the late 1940s and completed in 1950. There were severaldifferent versions of this hardware device but only one currently survives. Themachine converts pictures of the acoustic patterns of speech in the form of aspectrogram back into sound. Using this device, Alvin Liberman and colleagueswere able to discover acoustic cues for the perception of phonetic segments(consonants and vowels).Dominant systems in the 1980s and 1990s were the MITalk system, based largely onthe work of Dennis Klatt at MIT, and the Bell Labs system;[8] the latter was oneof the first multilingual language-independent systems, making extensive use ofNatural Language Processing methods.Early electronic speech synthesizers sounded robotic and were often barelyintelligible. The quality of synthesized speech has steadily improved, butoutput from contemporary speech synthesis systems is still clearlydistinguishable from actual human speech.As the cost-performance ratio causes speech synthesizers to become cheaper andmore accessible to the people, more people will benefit from the use oftext-to-speech programs.[9]</section>


<section>Section 2.1 Electronic devicesThe first computer-based speech synthesis systems were created in the late1950s, and the first complete text-to-speech system was completed in 1968. In1961, physicist John Larry Kelly, Jr and colleague Louis Gerstman[10] used anIBM 704 computer to synthesize speech, an event among the most prominent in thehistory of Bell Labs. Kelly's voice recorder synthesizer (vocoder) recreated thesong "Daisy Bell", with musical accompaniment from Max Mathews. Coincidentally,Arthur C. Clarke was visiting his friend and colleague John Pierce at the BellLabs Murray Hill facility. Clarke was so impressed by the demonstration that heused it in the climactic scene of his screenplay for his novel 2001: A SpaceOdyssey,[11] where the HAL 9000 computer sings the same song as it is being putto sleep by astronaut Dave Bowman.[12] Despite the success of purely electronicspeech synthesis, research is still being conducted into mechanical speechsynthesizers.[13]Handheld electronics featuring speech synthesis began emerging in the 1970s. Oneof the first was the Telesensory Systems Inc. (TSI) Speech+ portable calculatorfor the blind in 1976.[14][15] Other devices were produced primarily foreducational purposes, such as Speak & Spell, produced by Texas Instruments[16]in 1978. The first video game to feature speech synthesis was the 1980 shoot 'emup arcade game, Stratovox, from Sun Electronics.[17] The first multi-player gameusing voice synthesis was Milton from Milton Bradley Company, which produced thedevice in 1980.</section>


<section>Section 3 Synthesizer technologiesThe most important qualities of a speech synthesis system are naturalness andintelligibility. Naturalness describes how closely the output sounds like humanspeech, while intelligibility is the ease with which the output is understood.The ideal speech synthesizer is both natural and intelligible. Speech synthesissystems usually try to maximize both characteristics.The two primary technologies for generating synthetic speech waveforms areconcatenative synthesis and formant synthesis. Each technology has strengths andweaknesses, and the intended uses of a synthesis system will typically determinewhich approach is used.</section>


<section>Section 3.1Concatenative synthesisConcatenative synthesis is based on the concatenation (or stringing together) ofsegments of recorded speech. Generally, concatenative synthesis produces themost natural-sounding synthesized speech. However, differences between naturalvariations in speech and the nature of the automated techniques for segmentingthe waveforms sometimes result in audible glitches in the output. There arethree main sub-types of concatenative synthesis.Unit selection synthesisUnit selection synthesis uses large databases of recorded speech. Duringdatabase creation, each recorded utterance is segmented into some or all of thefollowing: individual phones, diphones, half-phones, syllables, morphemes,words, phrases, and sentences. Typically, the division into segments is doneusing a specially modified speech recognizer set to a "forced alignment" modewith some manual correction afterward, using visual representations such as thewaveform and spectrogram.[18] An index of the units in the speech database isthen created based on the segmentation and acoustic parameters like thefundamental frequency (pitch), duration, position in the syllable, andneighboring phones. At runtime, the desired target utterance is created bydetermining the best chain of candidate units from the database (unitselection). This process is typically achieved using a specially weighteddecision tree.Unit selection provides the greatest naturalness, because it applies only asmall amount of digital signal processing (DSP) to the recorded speech. DSPoften makes recorded speech sound less natural, although some systems use asmall amount of signal processing at the point of concatenation to smooth thewaveform. The output from the best unit-selection systems is oftenindistinguishable from real human voices, especially in contexts for which theTTS system has been tuned. However, maximum naturalness typically requireunit-selection speech databases to be very large, in some systems ranging intothe gigabytes of recorded data, representing dozens of hours of speech.[19]Also, unit selection algorithms have been known to select segments from a placethat results in less than ideal synthesis (e.g. minor words become unclear) evenwhen a better choice exists in the database.[20]Diphone synthesisDiphone synthesis uses a minimal speech database containing all the diphones(sound-to-sound transitions) occurring in a language. The number of diphonesdepends on the phonotactics of the language: for example, Spanish has about 800diphones, and German about 2500. In diphone synthesis, only one example of eachdiphone is contained in the speech database. At runtime, the target prosody of asentence is superimposed on these minimal units by means of digital signalprocessing techniques such as linear predictive coding, PSOLA[21] or MBROLA.[22]The quality of the resulting speech is generally worse than that ofunit-selection systems, but more natural-sounding than the output of formantsynthesizers. Diphone synthesis suffers from the sonic glitches of concatenativesynthesis and the robotic-sounding nature of formant synthesis, and has few ofthe advantages of either approach other than small size. As such, its use incommercial applications is declining, although it continues to be used inresearch because there are a number of freely available softwareimplementations.Domain-specific synthesisDomain-specific synthesis concatenates prerecorded words and phrases to createcomplete utterances. It is used in applications where the variety of texts thesystem will output is limited to a particular domain, like transit scheduleannouncements or weather reports.[23] The technology is very simple toimplement, and has been in commercial use for a long time, in devices liketalking clocks and calculators. The level of naturalness of these systems can bevery high because the variety of sentence types is limited, and they closelymatch the prosody and intonation of the original recordings.[citation needed]Because these systems are limited by the words and phrases in their databases,they are not general-purpose and can only synthesize the combinations of wordsand phrases with which they have been preprogrammed. The blending of wordswithin naturally spoken language however can still cause problems unless themany variations are taken into account. For example, in non-rhotic dialects ofEnglish the "r" in words like "clear" /?kl??/ is usually only pronounced whenthe following word has a vowel as its first letter (e.g. "clear out" is realizedas /?kl??????t/). Likewise in French, many final consonants become no longersilent if followed by a word that begins with a vowel, an effect called liaison.This alternation cannot be reproduced by a simple word-concatenation system,which would require additional complexity to be context-sensitive.</section>


<section>Section 3.2 Formant synthesisFormant synthesis does not use human speech samples at runtime. Instead, thesynthesized speech output is created using additive synthesis and an acousticmodel (physical modelling synthesis).[24] Parameters such as fundamentalfrequency, voicing, and noise levels are varied over time to create a waveformof artificial speech. This method is sometimes called rules-based synthesis;however, many concatenative systems also have rules-based components. Manysystems based on formant synthesis technology generate artificial,robotic-sounding speech that would never be mistaken for human speech. However,maximum naturalness is not always the goal of a speech synthesis system, andformant synthesis systems have advantages over concatenative systems.Formant-synthesized speech can be reliably intelligible, even at very highspeeds, avoiding the acoustic glitches that commonly plague concatenativesystems. High-speed synthesized speech is used by the visually impaired toquickly navigate computers using a screen reader. Formant synthesizers areusually smaller programs than concatenative systems because they do not have adatabase of speech samples. They can therefore be used in embedded systems,where memory and microprocessor power are especially limited. Becauseformant-based systems have complete control of all aspects of the output speech,a wide variety of prosodies and intonations can be output, conveying not justquestions and statements, but a variety of emotions and tones of voice.Examples of non-real-time but highly accurate intonation control in formantsynthesis include the work done in the late 1970s for the Texas Instruments toySpeak & Spell, and in the early 1980s Sega arcade machines.[25] and in manyAtari, Inc. arcade games[26] using the TMS5220 LPC Chips. Creating properintonation for these projects was painstaking, and the results have yet to bematched by real-time text-to-speech interfaces.[27]</section>


<section>Section 3.3 Articulatory synthesisArticulatory synthesis refers to computational techniques for synthesizingspeech based on models of the human vocal tract and the articulation processesoccurring there. The first articulatory synthesizer regularly used forlaboratory experiments was developed at Haskins Laboratories in the mid-1970s byPhilip Rubin, Tom Baer, and Paul Mermelstein. This synthesizer, known as ASY,was based on vocal tract models developed at Bell Laboratories in the 1960s and1970s by Paul Mermelstein, Cecil Coker, and colleagues.Until recently, articulatory synthesis models have not been incorporated intocommercial speech synthesis systems. A notable exception is the NeXT-basedsystem originally developed and marketed by Trillium Sound Research, a spin-offcompany of the University of Calgary, where much of the original research wasconducted. Following the demise of the various incarnations of NeXT (started bySteve Jobs in the late 1980s and merged with Apple Computer in 1997), theTrillium software was published under the GNU General Public License, with workcontinuing as gnuspeech. The system, first marketed in 1994, provides fullarticulatory-based text-to-speech conversion using a waveguide ortransmission-line analog of the human oral and nasal tracts controlled byCarré's "distinctive region model".</section>


<section>Section 3.4 HMM-based synthesisHMM-based synthesis is a synthesis method based on hidden Markov models, alsocalled Statistical Parametric Synthesis. In this system, the frequency spectrum(vocal tract), fundamental frequency (vocal source), and duration (prosody) ofspeech are modeled simultaneously by HMMs. Speech waveforms are generated fromHMMs themselves based on the maximum likelihood criterion.[28]</section>


<section>Section 3.5 Sinewave synthesisSinewave synthesis is a technique for synthesizing speech by replacing theformants (main bands of energy) with pure tone whistles.[29]</section>


<section>Section 4 Challenges</section>


<section>Section 4.1 Text normalization challengesThe process of normalizing text is rarely straightforward. Texts are full ofheteronyms, numbers, and abbreviations that all require expansion into aphonetic representation. There are many spellings in English which arepronounced differently based on context. For example, "My latest project is tolearn how to better project my voice" contains two pronunciations of "project".Most text-to-speech (TTS) systems do not generate semantic representations oftheir input texts, as processes for doing so are not reliable, well understood,or computationally effective. As a result, various heuristic techniques are usedto guess the proper way to disambiguate homographs, like examining neighboringwords and using statistics about frequency of occurrence.Recently TTS systems have begun to use HMMs (discussed above) to generate "partsof speech" to aid in disambiguating homographs. This technique is quitesuccessful for many cases such as whether "read" should be pronounced as "red"implying past tense, or as "reed" implying present tense. Typical error rateswhen using HMMs in this fashion are usually below five percent. These techniquesalso work well for most European languages, although access to required trainingcorpora is frequently difficult in these languages.Deciding how to convert numbers is another problem that TTS systems have toaddress. It is a simple programming challenge to convert a number into words (atleast in English), like "1325" becoming "one thousand three hundredtwenty-five." However, numbers occur in many different contexts; "1325" may alsobe read as "one three two five", "thirteen twenty-five" or "thirteen hundred andtwenty five". A TTS system can often infer how to expand a number based onsurrounding words, numbers, and punctuation, and sometimes the system provides away to specify the context if it is ambiguous.[30] Roman numerals can also beread differently depending on context. For example "Henry VIII" reads as "Henrythe Eighth", while "Chapter VIII" reads as "Chapter Eight".Similarly, abbreviations can be ambiguous. For example, the abbreviation "in"for "inches" must be differentiated from the word "in", and the address "12 StJohn St." uses the same abbreviation for both "Saint" and "Street". TTS systemswith intelligent front ends can make educated guesses about ambiguousabbreviations, while others provide the same result in all cases, resulting innonsensical (and sometimes comical) outputs.</section>


<section>Section 4.2 Text-to-phoneme challengesSpeech synthesis systems use two basic approaches to determine the pronunciationof a word based on its spelling, a process which is often called text-to-phonemeor grapheme-to-phoneme conversion (phoneme is the term used by linguists todescribe distinctive sounds in a language). The simplest approach totext-to-phoneme conversion is the dictionary-based approach, where a largedictionary containing all the words of a language and their correctpronunciations is stored by the program. Determining the correct pronunciationof each word is a matter of looking up each word in the dictionary and replacingthe spelling with the pronunciation specified in the dictionary. The otherapproach is rule-based, in which pronunciation rules are applied to words todetermine their pronunciations based on their spellings. This is similar to the"sounding out", or synthetic phonics, approach to learning reading.Each approach has advantages and drawbacks. The dictionary-based approach isquick and accurate, but completely fails if it is given a word which is not inits dictionary.[citation needed] As dictionary size grows, so too does thememory space requirements of the synthesis system. On the other hand, therule-based approach works on any input, but the complexity of the rules growssubstantially as the system takes into account irregular spellings orpronunciations. (Consider that the word "of" is very common in English, yet isthe only word in which the letter "f" is pronounced [v].) As a result, nearlyall speech synthesis systems use a combination of these approaches.Languages with a phonemic orthography have a very regular writing system, andthe prediction of the pronunciation of words based on their spellings is quitesuccessful. Speech synthesis systems for such languages often use the rule-basedmethod extensively, resorting to dictionaries only for those few words, likeforeign names and borrowings, whose pronunciations are not obvious from theirspellings. On the other hand, speech synthesis systems for languages likeEnglish, which have extremely irregular spelling systems, are more likely torely on dictionaries, and to use rule-based methods only for unusual words, orwords that aren't in their dictionaries.</section>


<section>Section 4.3 Evaluation challengesThe consistent evaluation of speech synthesis systems may be difficult becauseof a lack of universally agreed objective evaluation criteria. Differentorganizations often use different speech data. The quality of speech synthesissystems also depends to a large degree on the quality of the productiontechnique (which may involve analogue or digital recording) and on thefacilities used to replay the speech. Evaluating speech synthesis systems hastherefore often been compromised by differences between production techniquesand replay facilities.Recently, however, some researchers have started to evaluate speech synthesissystems using a common speech dataset.[31]</section>


<section>Section 4.4 Prosodics and emotional contentA recent study reported in the journal "Speech Communication" by Amy Drahota andcolleagues at the University of Portsmouth, UK, reported that listeners to voicerecordings could determine, at better than chance levels, whether or not thespeaker was smiling.[32] It was suggested that identification of the vocalfeatures which signal emotional content may be used to help make synthesizedspeech sound more natural.</section>


<section>Section 5 5 5 5 5 Dedicated hardwareVotraxSC-01A (analog formant)SC-02 / SSI-263 / "Arctic 263"General Instruments SP0256-AL2 (CTS256A-AL2, MEA8000)Magnevation SpeakJet (www.speechchips.com TTS256)Savage Innovations SoundGinNational Semiconductor DT1050 Digitalker (Mozer)Silicon Systems SSI 263 (analog formant)Texas Instruments LPC Speech ChipsTMS5110ATMS5200Oki SemiconductorML22825 (ADPCM)ML22573 (HQADPCM)Toshiba T6721APhilips PCF8200TextSpeak Embedded TTS Modules</section>


<section>Section 6 Computer operating systems or outlets with speech synthesis</section>


<section>Section AtariArguably, the first speech system integrated into an operating system was the1400XL/1450XL personal computers designed by Atari, Inc. using the Votrax SC01chip in 1983. The 1400XL/1450XL computers used a Finite State Machine to enableWorld English Spelling text-to-speech synthesis.[33] Unfortunately, the1400XL/1450XL personal computers never shipped in quantity.The Atari ST computers were sold with "stspeech.tos" on floppy disk.</section>


<section>Section AppleThe first speech system integrated into an operating system that shipped inquantity was Apple Computer's MacInTalk in 1984. Since the 1980s MacintoshComputers offered text to speech capabilities through The MacinTalk software. Inthe early 1990s Apple expanded its capabilities offering system widetext-to-speech support. With the introduction of faster PowerPC-based computersthey included higher quality voice sampling. Apple also introduced speechrecognition into its systems which provided a fluid command set. More recently,Apple has added sample-based voices. Starting as a curiosity, the speech systemof Apple Macintosh has evolved into a fully-supported program, PlainTalk, forpeople with vision problems. VoiceOver was for the first time featured in Mac OSX Tiger (10.4). During 10.4 (Tiger) & first releases of 10.5 (Leopard) there wasonly one standard voice shipping with Mac OS X. Starting with 10.6 (SnowLeopard), the user can choose out of a wide range list of multiple voices.VoiceOver voices feature the taking of realistic-sounding breaths betweensentences, as well as improved clarity at high read rates over PlainTalk. Mac OSX also includes say, a command-line based application that converts text toaudible speech. The AppleScript Standard Additions includes a say verb thatallows a script to use any of the installed voices and to control the pitch,speaking rate and modulation of the spoken text.</section>


<section>Section AmigaOSThe second operating system with advanced speech synthesis capabilities wasAmigaOS, introduced in 1985. The voice synthesis was licensed by CommodoreInternational from a third-party software house (Don't Ask Software, nowSoftvoice, Inc.) and it featured a complete system of voice emulation, with bothmale and female voices and "stress" indicator markers, made possible by advancedfeatures of the Amiga hardware audio chipset.[34] It was divided into a narratordevice and a translator library. Amiga Speak Handler featured a text-to-speechtranslator. AmigaOS considered speech synthesis a virtual hardware device, sothe user could even redirect console output to it. Some Amiga programs, such asword processors, made extensive use of the speech system.</section>


<section>Section Microsoft WindowsSee also: Microsoft AgentModern Windows systems use SAPI4- and SAPI5-based speech systems that include aspeech recognition engine (SRE). SAPI 4.0 was available on Microsoft-basedoperating systems as a third-party add-on for systems like Windows 95 andWindows 98. Windows 2000 added a speech synthesis program called Narrator,directly available to users. All Windows-compatible programs could make use ofspeech synthesis features, available through menus once installed on the system.Microsoft Speech Server is a complete package for voice synthesis andrecognition, for commercial applications such as call centers.Text-to-Speech (TTS) capabilities for a computer refers to the ability to playback text in a spoken voice. TTS is the ability of the operating system to playback printed text as spoken words.[35]An internal (installed with the operating system) driver (called a TTS engine):recognizes the text and using a synthesized voice (chosen from severalpre-generated voices) speaks the written text. Additional engines (often use acertain jargon or vocabulary) are also available through third-partymanufacturers.[35]</section>


<section>Section AndroidVersion 1.6 of Android added support for speech synthesis (TTS).[36]</section>


<section>Section InternetThe most recent TTS development in the web browser, is the JavaScript Text toSpeech work of Yury Delendik, which ports the Flite C engine to pure JavaScript.This allows web pages to convert text to audio using HTML5 technology. Theability to use Yury's TTS port currently requires a custom browser build thatuses Mozilla's Audio-Data-API. However, much work is being done in the contextof the W3C to move this technology into the mainstream browser market throughthe W3C Audio Incubator Group with the involvement of The BBC and Google Inc.Currently, there are a number of applications, plugins and gadgets that can readmessages directly from an e-mail client and web pages from a web browser orGoogle Toolbar such as Text-to-voice which is an add-on to Firefox . Somespecialized software can narrate RSS-feeds. On one hand, online RSS-narratorssimplify information delivery by allowing users to listen to their favouritenews sources and to convert them to podcasts. On the other hand, on-lineRSS-readers are available on almost any PC connected to the Internet. Users candownload generated audio files to portable devices, e.g. with a help of podcastreceiver, and listen to them while walking, jogging or commuting to work.A growing field in internet based TTS is web-based assistive technology, e.g.'Browsealoud' from a UK company and Readspeaker. It can deliver TTSfunctionality to anyone (for reasons of accessibility, convenience,entertainment or information) with access to a web browser. The non-profitproject Pediaphon was created in 2006 to provide a similar web-based TTSinterface to the Wikipedia.[37] Additionally SPEAK.TO.ME from Oxford InformationLaboratories is capable of delivering text to speech through any browser withoutthe need to download any special applications, and includes smart deliverytechnology to ensure only what is seen is spoken and the content is logicallypathed.</section>


<section>Section OthersSome e-book readers, such as the Amazon Kindle.Some models of Texas Instruments home computers produced in 1979 and 1981 (TexasInstruments TI-99/4 and TI-99/4A) were capable of text-to-phoneme synthesis orreciting complete words and phrases (text-to-dictionary), using a very popularSpeech Synthesizer peripheral. TI used a proprietary codec to embed completespoken phrases into applications, primarily video games.[38]IBM's OS/2 Warp 4 included VoiceType, a precursor to IBM ViaVoice.Systems that operate on free and open source software systems including Linuxare various, and include open-source programs such as the Festival SpeechSynthesis System which uses diphone-based synthesis (and can use a limitednumber of MBROLA voices), and gnuspeech which uses articulatory synthesis[39]from the Free Software Foundation.Companies which developed speech synthesis systems but which are no longer inthis business include BeST Speech (bought by L&H), Eloquent Technology (boughtby SpeechWorks), Lernout & Hauspie (bought by Nuance), SpeechWorks (bought byNuance), Rhetorical Systems (bought by Nuance).</section>


<section>Section 7 Speech synthesis markup languagesA number of markup languages have been established for the rendition of text asspeech in an XML-compliant format. The most recent is Speech Synthesis MarkupLanguage (SSML), which became a W3C recommendation in 2004. Older speechsynthesis markup languages include Java Speech Markup Language (JSML) and SABLE.Although each of these was proposed as a standard, none of them has been widelyadopted.Speech synthesis markup languages are distinguished from dialogue markuplanguages. VoiceXML, for example, includes tags related to speech recognition,dialogue management and touchtone dialing, in addition to text-to-speech markup.</section>


<section>Section 8 ApplicationsSpeech synthesis has long been a vital assistive technology tool and itsapplication in this area is significant and widespread. It allows environmentalbarriers to be removed for people with a wide range of disabilities. The longestapplication has been in the use of screen readers for people with visualimpairment, but text-to-speech systems are now commonly used by people withdyslexia and other reading difficulties as well as by pre-literate children.They are also frequently employed to aid those with severe speech impairmentusually through a dedicated voice output communication aid.Sites such as Ananova and YAKiToMe! have used speech synthesis to convertwritten news to audio content, which can be used for mobile applications.Speech synthesis techniques are used as well in the entertainment productionssuch as games, animation and similar. In 2007, Animo Limited announced thedevelopment of a software application package based on its speech synthesissoftware FineSpeech, explicitly geared towards customers in the entertainmentindustries, able to generate narration and lines of dialogue according to userspecifications.[40] The application reached maturity in 2008, when NEC Biglobeannounced a web service that allows users to create phrases from the voices ofCode Geass: Lelouch of the Rebellion R2 characters.[41]TTS applications such as YAKiToMe! and Speakonia are often used to add syntheticvoices to YouTube videos for comedic effect, as in Barney Bunch videos.YAKiToMe! is also used to convert entire books for personal podcasting purposes,RSS feeds and web pages for news stories, and educational texts for enhancedlearning.Software such as Vocaloid can generate singing voices via lyrics and melody.This is also the aim of the Singing Computer project (which uses GNU LilyPondand Festival) to help blind people check their lyric input.[42]Next to these applications is the use of text to speech software also popular inInteractive Voice Response systems, often in combination with speechrecognition. Examples of such voices can be found at speechsynthesissoftware.comor Nextup.</section></section>